And when you start to understand its motivation, its movement,
and its enthusiasm for the first time, so I think
that the generation of those guys who came to the
Dharbaya Fnirtset will not compliment you,
but like you.
That is, it is an interest to everyone.
That is, it is the fact that when I moved
to the Dharbaya Fnirtset, why did I go to the
gym, to the Olympics, and so on, and so on.
I will also tell you, this is the second, I
think, the third,
the first release in 2015, maybe not?
No, you know, it was for me, it was a
job.
Yes, that is why.
No, the bright ones, when people meet, but the Fnirtset
Fnirtset Fnirtset Fnirtset didn't tell you how it turned out.
No, no, no.
He worked here, and his guys who studied there,
and invited him to watch the university, he came to
me,
we talked, talked, and I said, let me tell you,
I can't go on a date with him, he can
ask for it.
I came here to work, to see him, I said,
I have two, I had to see him, and then
I went to the gym.
And then?
Well, he was like, I should think of something, I
said, well, I can think of it, I said, I
said, 30 seconds.
It would be such a top of a recruiter, right?
You know.
Here, yes, this is...
Yes, you are the same example.
I mean...
Kenyz is working with you.
Yes, Kenyz.
I think that I can't adapt him.
This is just the conservatism that started to appear at
some point in the university.
I think that he worked, he came to the gym,
then he looked,
there were such guys who understood that we need to
move together.
Well, you understand, I always come here like this, like
this example.
We still have some kind of environment, right?
The roads of the mountains,
and you already took the motor to the Mercedes or
some kind of car, then you can't compete there with
simple juggles.
That's why I started to understand it.
I said, move there.
This example is also...
I mean, Arthur is not offended by me.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
This is one of the most successful founders of the
Kostansk.
Well, yes.
I want to tell you something.
He worked with us as a team at the university,
and then I had a chance to send a kid
to the university.
It was a prize, right?
From California.
Yes, yes, yes.
We went from the city to the city, to the
city, to the city, to the city, to the city,
to the first, to the city of Arthur.
Well, he comes here too.
The city is also successful.
Well, Arthur comes, he comes,
everything, he ate, he fulfilled his mission.
And here, just like he did with me, we offered
him a token.
He also worked as an instructor.
He also went well.
He went straight away.
Then, somewhere in Arthur, he met me.
It was such a situation.
They made a project there.
He was a partner.
He wrote that he found an investor there.
Well, I don't know how much, maybe a million?
Yes, yes.
And what to do?
I don't even think about it.
Yes, a great story.
And he went and now you can say, calculate how
much?
Well, I remember Tweet,
when the Prime Minister of Great Britain,
Risha Sunak, he was in his company, that is, when
they brought a very small round there,
and he was a series B.
He was one of the leaders, an artificial intelligence, an
advertising company,
and that is, this is such a company.
At that time, it was like, it was called a
moment.
And then, after that, in London, it was called,
how do you,
literally, take five seconds to make a decision?
Well,
it is such a decision, they come immediately.
they didn't even think about it.
You know, that is, he was already here in such
a good, warm place, you can say, for a young
person, and he went.
So, you don't block any of these things?
No, that's not the case.
Yes, that's right.
You allow him to know.
There were a lot of such cases.
And I'm not all, so I'm saying that it was
hard to remember that you were one of the bright
episodes.
That's right, that's right.
You remember, meeting with Smut, maybe other scientists,
with whom you met, who, you don't want to talk
about, take your career.
Well, first of all, when we went for the first
time,
at the very beginning, I did it, I was responsible
for the strategy, for the science,
then I said to Americans, I said, I need an
interview, I said,
I said, let's do it the most.
I said,
I'm a candidate for the committee.
I was sitting, I was talking to him.
And fortunately, we worked with many national laboratories, and it
became very dense, with a portable lamp, in California.
And we still had lamps.
In Lawrence?
Yes, in Lawrence.
We still had lamps, we still had a very wild
one.
By the way, what is Smut like here,
although as a parallel patient, I don't know him there.
I know him.
But I don't know him.
Well, And there I met a lot of people there,
Simon Horson, for example, he was now a vice -president
with whom we talked about everything, he signed a memorandum
with them.
And he now, in my opinion,
for the Emirates, there is something like this, to expand
the same school.
Then there were a number of students, too.
We were told to build together with them, with Berkley,
in the name of the university, there is a teacher,
Aynur.
Of course, we planned a big one.
Well, it didn't work out very well, but it turned
out to be a successful teacher, Yonov.
And there were a lot of experiments, especially in terms
of science.
I'm going to do it now.
It turns out that Yonov, especially the parents, has a
lot to do with him, and so on.
In fact, it's more relevant with the physics of the
space.
Therefore,
here we are, too, not with the climate,
so...
So there is no need for the university.
They are almost everywhere.
Berkley was our strategic partner.
And we had to make a tradition to make partners.
Well, once in a year, they invited them.
They came from there, they were there, they came a
lot, they moved forward.
Then,
even in a few years of cooperation, they came.
And we still have such an opportunity for our
students and the doctorates.
They went to Berkley.
Well, they have a safe trip there.
And all that is inside Berkley.
All of this is free.
They win the grand, and work there.
In laboratories,
in the san laboratory.
It started with all kinds of casinos that were necessary
for the use of equipment, and so on.
And so on.
They gave it free.
I think it's a bright thing, which is successful,
to help universities develop science.
But today, there are some scientific researches and there are
some scientific researches.
And I will talk about this later, not only in
the form of publications,
but also in the form of just collaborations with the
best leading scientists in the world.
Great.
Let's talk about the Zero -2060.
This is one of the projects in the researches of
carbon.
When you have the number of CO2, which is produced,
the number of which you collect, that is, one of
the few people who...
Well, it's all about this.
You know, it's such a thing, that scientists have paid
attention to the fact that
all these changes are observed, they are changing the climate,
let's say, the warming, it's a long -term period.
And they managed to make the anthropogenic that is, well,
climate change is related to the development of planetary processes,
water processes.
And it was noticed in 1987, that scientists said
that they later started to develop the topic, develop it,
and then started to model the possible consequences for humanity
in general.
Well, and this is the story about the destruction of
the carbon effect.
Of course, it became clear that it is one of
the reasons of the carbon effect, that is,
the heat is maintained on the planet,
and this is the future of the planet.
gradually.
And one of the main partners of the gas, CO2,
is the production of the energy activity, basically.
Well, there are also methane, as well as the space
connected to the energy activity, the natural methane which is
divided into the swamp, There is something else there.
Well, the metal, which is there, let's say, when you
are at your age, that is, it is a whole,
too.
Therefore, these began to start from the start.
The scientists, then the politicians, the representatives of my opinion,
came to the convention to change the climate.
He said,
then, in this case, they turned it off.
They understood that it is, in general, like all countries,
we need, with all the countries in the field, to
talk about something like that.
Well,
and they have already connected diplomats.
And the journalists began to work with the humanitarian scheme,
as it may be, to manage the processes.
Well, I will not evaluate the result, while I will
tell you that it is successful.
Well, in general, everyone understood that it is necessary to
take the country into account the solutions.
And there was such a culture,
without the natural life, as it is said,
propaganda and so on.
Therefore, Kazakhstan, too, was not left aside.
We, on the other hand,
have a lot of big issues.
If we are not in a possible way, we are
in the field.
We are in the field of our economy.
There are dozens of us, maybe we are in the
field.
Well, therefore, we are also in this part.
Well, since then, when the United States has not been
established, Kazakhstan has become ...
And then they invited me to take care of this
topic.
And then, in the direction of the country, actually even
in a larger city of the Middle East, I was
engaged in negotiations, while we came to the state of
Kazakhstan.
We came to Kazakhstan, as a state, which is a
country that, as it were, with the transition to the
economy.
Well, which, you can not afford such a radical movement
in terms of low -qualityness.
Well, we will strive.
The first and second, we say that especially if there
will be such indecision help, then, of course, we can
change everything.
Well, the main thing is our energy resources.
You know, this is a corner.
We will stop using it.
Also, at the same time, it was not long ago.
But nevertheless,
they started to think about it.
And on the same stage, we have appeared, as a
matter of fact, about the launch of some projects that
were supported by the energy resources.
It was probably 2005, 2006.
And then we found the mechanisms for the final improvements
of the energy resources, the solar, the small gas, and
so on.
And the business of which was pulled, because they created
a good condition for it, for it to be able
to project and realize.
And in the mechanism of support, they improved everything.
They improved everything.
In principle, today, in my opinion, three percent, maybe more.
I did not do anything else there.
We use the energy resources there.
Well,
I, in general, prepared for such a more measured position.
I think that, yes, we can not only clean energy,
absolutely clean energy.
But we could, for example, replace it, and make gas,
for example.